README.md, before:

# Speech-to-Speech Translator

[![CI](https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Docker Build](https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator)](LICENSE)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12-blue)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/graph/badge.svg?token=CODECOV_TOKEN)](https://codecov.io/gh/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator)


Transform your audio content into any language with high accuracy and natural-sounding speech. Powered by Google Gemini Models.

> [!WARNING]
> **Single Speaker Only**: This project is currently optimized for videos with a single speaker. Multi-speaker support with distinct voice assignment is experimental and may produce unexpected results.

## 🚀 Features

- **Hybrid STT+TTS Pipeline**: Utilizes a robust two-step process:
  1.  **Speech-to-Text & Translation**: Uses `gemini-3-pro-preview` (configurable) for high-accuracy transcription and translation.
  2.  **Text-to-Speech**: Uses `gemini-2.5-pro-preview-tts` (configurable) to generate natural-sounding speech in the target language.
- **Natural Translation**: leveraging advanced TTS capabilities to maintain a natural audible flow.
- **Timestamp Alignment**: Automatically syncs the translated speech duration to match the original video/audio.
- **Smart Chunking**: Handles long files by intelligently splitting based on silence.
- **Video Input Support**: Automatically extracts audio from video files (mp4, mov, mkv, etc.) for translation.
- **YouTube Support**: Download and translate audio directly from YouTube URL.
- **Audio Ducking**: (Optional) Mixes the translated voice with the original background audio.

## 📥 Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator.git
   cd speech-to-speech-translator
   ```

2. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   # OR
   pip install .
   # OR if using PDM
   pdm install
   ```

3. **FFmpeg is required** for audio processing.
   - Ubuntu: `sudo apt install ffmpeg`
   - macOS: `brew install ffmpeg`
   - Windows: Download from ffmpeg.org and add to PATH.

4. **Set up your API Key:**

   1. Go to [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/).
   2. Sign in with your Google account.
   3. Click on **"Get API key"** (top left).
   4. Click **"Create API key"** (or use an existing project).
   5. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and paste your key:
      ```bash
      cp .env.example .env
      # Open .env and set GOOGLE_API_KEY=your_copied_key_here
      ```

5. **(Optional) Configure Models:**

   You can override the default models by setting environment variables in your `.env` file:

   ```bash
   THINKING_MODEL=gemini-3-pro-preview
   TTS_MODEL=gemini-2.5-pro-preview-tts
   ```

## 🎙️ Usage

### Zero-Config CLI

Translate a file to English (Auto-detects audio/video):
```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli input.mp3 --lang "English"
# Output: input_translated.mp3
```

Translate a YouTube video (Auto-dubs translated audio over video):
```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ" --lang "French"
# Output: [Video Title] [VideoID]_translated.mp4
```

### List Available Models

To see all available Gemini models:
```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli list-models
```

### Advanced Options

```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli input.mp4 \
  --lang "Spanish" \
  --output custom_audio.mp3 \
  --ducking \
```

### Docker Usage

You can run the tool without installing dependencies on your host machine using Docker.

1. **Build the image**:
   ```bash
   docker compose build
   ```

2. **Run a translation**:
   Place your input file (e.g., `input.mp3`) in the project directory.
   ```bash
   docker compose run --rm translator translate input.mp3 --lang "English"
   ```
   *Note: The current directory is mounted to `/app/data` inside the container, so input and output files are read/written directly to your host folder.*

3. **Translate a YouTube video**:
   ```bash
   docker compose run --rm translator translate "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ" --lang "French"
   ```

4. **List available models**:
   ```bash
    docker compose run --rm translator list-models
   ```


## 🏗️ Architecture

This project uses a modular "Service" pattern:

- **Core Audio**: `pydub` handles splitting, merging, effects, and raw PCM containment.
- **AI Engine**: `google-generativeai` interfaces with Gemini Models for translation and TTS.
- **Orchestrator**: Manages the pipeline of Chunk -> STT -> TTS -> Merge.

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

feat: Add dialogue mode with multi-speaker diarization and TTS voice assignment

README.md, after:

# Speech-to-Speech Translator

[![CI](https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![Docker Build](https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator)](LICENSE)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12-blue)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator/graph/badge.svg?token=CODECOV_TOKEN)](https://codecov.io/gh/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator)


Transform your audio content into any language with high accuracy and natural-sounding speech. Powered by Google Gemini Models.

> [!NOTE]
> **Modes**: The tool supports two modes: `monologue` (default, single voice) and `dialogue` (multi-speaker detection).

## 🚀 Features

- **Hybrid STT+TTS Pipeline**: Utilizes a robust two-step process:
  1.  **Speech-to-Text & Translation**: Uses `gemini-3-pro-preview` (configurable) for high-accuracy transcription and translation.
  2.  **Text-to-Speech**: Uses `gemini-2.5-pro-preview-tts` (configurable) to generate natural-sounding speech in the target language.
- **Dialogue Support**: (`--mode dialogue`) Detects multiple speakers and assigns distinct voices (Man, Woman, Boy, Girl, etc.) to each.
- **Natural Translation**: leveraging advanced TTS capabilities to maintain a natural audible flow.
- **Timestamp Alignment**: Automatically syncs the translated speech duration to match the original video/audio.
- **Smart Chunking**: Handles long files by intelligently splitting based on silence.
- **Video Input Support**: Automatically extracts audio from video files (mp4, mov, mkv, etc.) for translation.
- **YouTube Support**: Download and translate audio directly from YouTube URL.
- **Audio Ducking**: (Optional) Mixes the translated voice with the original background audio.

## 📥 Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/artryazanov/speech-to-speech-translator.git
   cd speech-to-speech-translator
   ```

2. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   # OR
   pip install .
   # OR if using PDM
   pdm install
   ```

3. **FFmpeg is required** for audio processing.
   - Ubuntu: `sudo apt install ffmpeg`
   - macOS: `brew install ffmpeg`
   - Windows: Download from ffmpeg.org and add to PATH.

4. **Set up your API Key:**

   1. Go to [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/).
   2. Sign in with your Google account.
   3. Click on **"Get API key"** (top left).
   4. Click **"Create API key"** (or use an existing project).
   5. Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and paste your key:
      ```bash
      cp .env.example .env
      # Open .env and set GOOGLE_API_KEY=your_copied_key_here
      ```

5. **(Optional) Configure Models:**

   You can override the default models by setting environment variables in your `.env` file:

   ```bash
   THINKING_MODEL=gemini-3-pro-preview
   TTS_MODEL=gemini-2.5-pro-preview-tts
   ```

## 🎙️ Usage

### Zero-Config CLI

Translate a file to English (Auto-detects audio/video):
```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli input.mp3 --lang "English"
# Output: input_translated.mp3
```

Translate a YouTube video (Auto-dubs translated audio over video):
```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ" --lang "French"
# Output: [Video Title] [VideoID]_translated.mp4
```

### List Available Models

To see all available Gemini models:
```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli list-models
```

### Advanced Options

```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli input.mp4 \
  --lang "Spanish" \
  --output custom_audio.mp3 \
  --ducking \
```

### Dialogue Mode

For content with multiple speakers (interviews, podcasts, movies), use the `dialogue` mode:

```bash
python -m speech_translator.cli interview.mp4 --lang "German" --mode dialogue
```

This will:
1.  Diarize the audio to identify speakers.
2.  Assign specific voices based on gender/age (e.g., *Fenrir* for men, *Kore* for women).
3.  Stitch the segments back together.

### Docker Usage

You can run the tool without installing dependencies on your host machine using Docker.

1. **Build the image**:
   ```bash
   docker compose build
   ```

2. **Run a translation**:
   Place your input file (e.g., `input.mp3`) in the project directory.
   ```bash
   docker compose run --rm translator translate input.mp3 --lang "English"
   ```
   *Note: The current directory is mounted to `/app/data` inside the container, so input and output files are read/written directly to your host folder.*

3. **Translate a YouTube video**:
   ```bash
   docker compose run --rm translator translate "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dQw4w9WgXcQ" --lang "French"
   ```

4. **List available models**:
   ```bash
    docker compose run --rm translator list-models
   ```


## 🏗️ Architecture

This project uses a modular "Service" pattern:

- **Core Audio**: `pydub` handles splitting, merging, effects, and raw PCM containment.
- **AI Engine**: `google-generativeai` interfaces with Gemini Models for translation and TTS.
- **Orchestrator**: Manages the pipeline of Chunk -> STT -> TTS -> Merge.

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
